STORAGE.md, before:


## Resolution (Read)

The resolution of a `did:cel` identifier is the process of retrieving and validating its event log to produce a compliant DID Document. This method is self-certifying and registry-agnostic, relying on the cryptographic integrity of the log's inception.

### Hybrid Discovery
The `did:cel` method supports a hybrid discovery model. While the `storage` parameter provides a high-performance, deterministic path for resolution, it does not represent a centralized point of failure, the identity is content-addressable, the same log can be hosted across multiple providers, peer-to-peer networks. 

### Algorithm
To resolve a `did:cel` identifier, a resolver MUST perform the following steps:

1. Extract the Commitment: Parse the `method-specific-id` from the DID string to obtain `initial-event-log-hash`.
2. Locate the Log: Retrieve the Event Log array from a distributed registry or a location specified by the `storage` parameter. If a `storage` URL is provided, the resolver MAY fetch the resource at `[URL][method-specific-id]`.
3. Verify Inception: Perform a JCS (JSON Canonicalization Scheme) serialization of the first entry ($E_0$) in the log. The `sha3-256` hash of this value MUST exactly match the `initial-event-log-hash` extracted from the DID.
4. Validate Chain Integrity: Iterate through subsequent events ($E_1 \dots E_n$). For each event, verify that:
    * The `predecessor` field matches the hash of the previous event's JCS representation.
    * The event is signed by a key authorized in the state established by the previous event.
5. Project State: Apply the cumulative state changes (key additions, rotations, or service updates) defined in the verified log to construct the final DID Document.
6. Validate Origin: If the event log was retrieved by using a provided `storage` URL parameter, then that exact URL MUST be listed as an approved storage service within the service section of the assembled DID Document.

### Storage Parameter

* **Key:** `storage`
* **Value:** A valid URI (typically `https://...`) pointing to a directory or service.
* **Resolution Rule:** The resolver appends the `method-specific-id` to the `storage` value to form the final fetch URL.

### `storage`, `CelStorageService`, and URL Construction

The `did:cel` resolver uses a simple string concatenation rule to find logs. The final fetch URL is formed by appending the `method-specific-id` directly to the storage URL.

**Examples**

Path-Based (Static Hosting):
  * `storage`: `https://storage.googleapis.com/did-cel-log/`
  * URL: `https://storage.googleapis.com/did-cel-log/zW1b...`

Query-Based (Dynamic API):
  * `storage`: `https://example/resolve?q=`
  * URL: `https://example/resolve?q=zW1b...`

Native IPFS (Content-Addressable):
  * `storage`: `ipfs://bafybeigdy.../`
  * URL: `ipfs://bafybeigdy.../zW1b...`

### Immutability and Caching

The `did:cel` event log is a cryptographically immutable ledger. Because each event $E_n$ is linked via the hash of its predecessor $E_{n-1}$, the log functions as a tamper-evident chain. 

Implementations are encouraged to leverage this architecture through the following practices:

- Persistent Caching: Resolvers SHOULD cache verified events locally. Once an event is validated against the inception commitment and the chain of signatures, it never needs to be re-verified or re-fetched.
- Differential Updates: When resolving a DID, a resolver with a cached log only needs to fetch events subsequent to its local head. This minimizes bandwidth and significantly improves resolution speed.
- Network Resilience: Local caching ensures that the DID remains resolvable even if the primary `storage` provider is temporarily unreachable, supporting the decentralized and hybrid nature of the `did:cel` method.

## 6. Infrastructure and Manual Setup (GCloud)

For implementations leveraging the `storage` parameter, Google Cloud Storage (GCS) provides a highly available and globally distributed registry. This section describes the manual process for initializing storage and uploading the initial log.

### 6.1 Creating the Storage Bucket
The bucket acts as the static repository for the DID Event Logs. A single bucket can host any number of `did:cel` logs as flat files.

1.  **Create Bucket:** Initialize a bucket in a preferred region.
    ```bash
    gcloud storage buckets create gs://[STORAGE] --location=[REGION]
    ```
2.  **Enable Public Access:**  
To prevent the enumeration of all DIDs stored within a registry, the storage bucket MUST be configured to allow "Direct Object Fetch" while disabling "Bucket Listing."

  2.1.  **Selection of Role:** A custom IAM role (e.g., `celLogViewer`) SHOULD be defined at the project level. This role MUST contain the `storage.objects.get` permission and MUST exclude the `storage.objects.list` permission.
  2.2.  **Configuration Command:**
   ```bash
   gcloud iam roles create celLogViewer \
        --project=[PROJECT_ID] \
        --title="did:cel Log Viewer" \
        --permissions=storage.objects.get
   ``` 
   ```bash
   gcloud storage buckets add-iam-policy-binding gs://[STORAGE] \
        --member="allUsers" \
        --role="projects/[PROJECT_ID]/roles/celLogViewer"
   ```
  2.3.  **Resulting Behavior:**
   * Authorized Access: `GET /[method-specific-id]` returns the log.
   * Unauthorized Discovery: `GET /` (root listing) returns a `403 Forbidden` response.
    
### 6.2 Manual Log Upload
The initial log must be formatted as a JSON array containing the inception event ($E_0$). The filename MUST match the `method-specific-id`.

1.  **Naming Convention:** If the DID is `did:cel:zW1bVJv...`, the filename must be `zW1bVJv...`.
2.  **Upload Command:**
    ```bash
    gcloud storage cp log.json gs://[STORAGE]/[method-specific-id]
    ```
3.  **Metadata Configuration:** Ensure the `Content-Type` is set to `application/json` to prevent resolution errors during the fetch phase.
    ```bash
    gcloud storage objects update gs://[STORAGE]/[method-specific-id] \
        --content-type="application/json"
    ```

### 6.3 Resolution URI Construction
Once uploaded, the `storage` parameter in the DID URL should point to the bucket's public storage base:
`did:cel:method-specific-id?storage=https://storage.googleapis.com/did-cel-log/`


## 7. Validation of Resolution

To ensure the storage and resolution are correctly configured, the following validation steps SHOULD be performed.

### 7.1 Response Verification
A compliant resolver fetching the log MUST receive a `200 OK` status with `Content-Type: application/json`.

1.  **Direct Fetch Test:**
    ```bash
    curl -H "Accept: application/json" -I https://storage.googleapis.com/[BUCKET]/[DID_SUFFIX]
    ```

### 7.2 Cryptographic Integrity Check
The validation of the "Read" method is strictly cryptographic. A successful resolution MUST satisfy:
1.  **Hash Equality:** `sha3-256(JCS(Log[0]))` equals the `method-specific-id`.
2.  **Signature Validity:** The signature on the most recent event in the log corresponds to a public key defined in the active state.

### 7.3 DID Document Projection
The resulting DID Document MUST contain an `id` field exactly matching the input `did:cel` string, including the `storage` parameter used for discovery, as this parameter is part of the identifier's resolvable URL.

Commit message:

Add heartbeat verification to resolve steps

STORAGE.md, after:


## Resolution (Read)

The resolution of a `did:cel` identifier is the process of retrieving and validating its event log to produce a compliant DID Document. This method is self-certifying and registry-agnostic, relying on the cryptographic integrity of the log's inception.

### Hybrid Discovery
The `did:cel` method supports a hybrid discovery model. While the `storage` parameter provides a high-performance, deterministic path for resolution, it does not represent a centralized point of failure, the identity is content-addressable, the same log can be hosted across multiple providers, peer-to-peer networks. 

### Algorithm
To resolve a `did:cel` identifier, a resolver MUST perform the following steps:

1. Extract the Commitment: Parse the `method-specific-id` from the DID string to obtain `initial-event-log-hash`.
2. Locate the Log: Retrieve the Event Log array from a distributed registry or a location specified by the `storage` parameter. If a `storage` URL is provided, the resolver MAY fetch the resource at `[URL][method-specific-id]`.
3. Verify Inception: Perform a JCS (JSON Canonicalization Scheme) serialization of the first entry ($E_0$) in the log. The `sha3-256` hash of this value MUST exactly match the `initial-event-log-hash` extracted from the DID.
4. Validate Chain Integrity: Iterate through subsequent events ($E_1 \dots E_n$). For each event, verify that:
    - The `previousEventHash` matches the `sha3-256` hash of the previous event's JCS representation.
    - The event is signed by a key authorized in the state established by the previous event.
    - Witness Verification: The resolver MUST verify that the event contains a sufficient number of valid witness signatures. The specific threshold and selection of required witnesses are determined by application-level logic based on the trust requirements of the relying party.
5. Verify Liveness (Heartbeat Chain): The resolver MUST verify a contiguous chain of heartbeat proofs throughout the log duration. 
    - Frequency Match: Heartbeats MUST occur at the interval frequency defined in the DID configuration or method defaults.
    - Continuity: Any gap in the heartbeat chain that exceeds the allowed threshold—without an accompanying deactivation or authorized suspension event—MUST result in a validation failure. This ensures that a storage provider cannot omit intermediate events or "freeze" the state in the past.
6. Project State: Apply the cumulative state changes (key additions, rotations, or service updates) defined in the verified log to construct the final DID Document.
7. Validate Origin: If the event log was retrieved by using a provided `storage` URL parameter, then that exact URL MUST be listed as an approved storage service within the `service` section of the assembled DID Document.

4. Validate Chain Integrity: Iterate through subsequent events ($E_1 \dots E_n$). For each event, verify that:
    * The `previousEventHash` matches the hash of the previous event's JCS representation.
    * The event is signed by a key authorized in the state established by the previous event.
    * Witness Verification: The resolver MUST verify that the event contains a sufficient number of valid witness signatures. The specific threshold and selection of required witnesses are determined by application-level logic based on the trust requirements of the relying party.
5. Project State: Apply the cumulative state changes (key additions, rotations, or service updates) defined in the verified log to construct the final DID Document.
6. Validate Origin: If the event log was retrieved by using a provided `storage` URL parameter, then that exact URL MUST be listed as an approved `CelStorageService` within the service section of the assembled DID Document.

### Storage Parameter

* **Key:** `storage`
* **Value:** A valid URI (typically `https://...`) pointing to a directory or service.
* **Resolution Rule:** The resolver appends the `method-specific-id` to the `storage` value to form the final fetch URL.

### `storage`, `CelStorageService`, and URL Construction

The `did:cel` resolver uses a simple string concatenation rule to find logs. The final fetch URL is formed by appending the `method-specific-id` directly to the storage URL.

**Examples**

Path-Based (Static Hosting):
  * `storage`: `https://storage.googleapis.com/did-cel-log/`
  * URL: `https://storage.googleapis.com/did-cel-log/zW1b...`

Query-Based (Dynamic API):
  * `storage`: `https://example/resolve?q=`
  * URL: `https://example/resolve?q=zW1b...`

Native IPFS (Content-Addressable):
  * `storage`: `ipfs://bafybeigdy.../`
  * URL: `ipfs://bafybeigdy.../zW1b...`

### Immutability and Caching

The `did:cel` event log is a cryptographically immutable ledger. Because each event $E_n$ is linked via the hash of its predecessor $E_{n-1}$, the log functions as a tamper-evident chain. 

Implementations are encouraged to leverage this architecture through the following practices:

- Persistent Caching: Resolvers SHOULD cache verified events locally. Once an event is validated against the inception commitment and the chain of signatures, it never needs to be re-verified or re-fetched.
- Differential Updates: When resolving a DID, a resolver with a cached log only needs to fetch events subsequent to its local head. This minimizes bandwidth and significantly improves resolution speed.
- Network Resilience: Local caching ensures that the DID remains resolvable even if the primary `storage` provider is temporarily unreachable, supporting the decentralized and hybrid nature of the `did:cel` method.

## 6. Infrastructure and Manual Setup (GCloud)

For implementations leveraging the `storage` parameter, Google Cloud Storage (GCS) provides a highly available and globally distributed registry. This section describes the manual process for initializing storage and uploading the initial log.

### 6.1 Creating the Storage Bucket
The bucket acts as the static repository for the DID Event Logs. A single bucket can host any number of `did:cel` logs as flat files.

1.  **Create Bucket:** Initialize a bucket in a preferred region.
    ```bash
    gcloud storage buckets create gs://[STORAGE] --location=[REGION]
    ```
2.  **Enable Public Access:**  
To prevent the enumeration of all DIDs stored within a registry, the storage bucket MUST be configured to allow "Direct Object Fetch" while disabling "Bucket Listing."

  2.1.  **Selection of Role:** A custom IAM role (e.g., `celLogViewer`) SHOULD be defined at the project level. This role MUST contain the `storage.objects.get` permission and MUST exclude the `storage.objects.list` permission.
  2.2.  **Configuration Command:**
   ```bash
   gcloud iam roles create celLogViewer \
        --project=[PROJECT_ID] \
        --title="did:cel Log Viewer" \
        --permissions=storage.objects.get
   ``` 
   ```bash
   gcloud storage buckets add-iam-policy-binding gs://[STORAGE] \
        --member="allUsers" \
        --role="projects/[PROJECT_ID]/roles/celLogViewer"
   ```
  2.3.  **Resulting Behavior:**
   * Authorized Access: `GET /[method-specific-id]` returns the log.
   * Unauthorized Discovery: `GET /` (root listing) returns a `403 Forbidden` response.
    
### 6.2 Manual Log Upload
The initial log must be formatted as a JSON array containing the inception event ($E_0$). The filename MUST match the `method-specific-id`.

1.  **Naming Convention:** If the DID is `did:cel:zW1bVJv...`, the filename must be `zW1bVJv...`.
2.  **Upload Command:**
    ```bash
    gcloud storage cp log.json gs://[STORAGE]/[method-specific-id]
    ```
3.  **Metadata Configuration:** Ensure the `Content-Type` is set to `application/json` to prevent resolution errors during the fetch phase.
    ```bash
    gcloud storage objects update gs://[STORAGE]/[method-specific-id] \
        --content-type="application/json"
    ```

### 6.3 Resolution URI Construction
Once uploaded, the `storage` parameter in the DID URL should point to the bucket's public storage base:
`did:cel:method-specific-id?storage=https://storage.googleapis.com/did-cel-log/`


## 7. Validation of Resolution

To ensure the storage and resolution are correctly configured, the following validation steps SHOULD be performed.

### 7.1 Response Verification
A compliant resolver fetching the log MUST receive a `200 OK` status with `Content-Type: application/json`.

1.  **Direct Fetch Test:**
    ```bash
    curl -H "Accept: application/json" -I https://storage.googleapis.com/[BUCKET]/[DID_SUFFIX]
    ```

### 7.2 Cryptographic Integrity Check
The validation of the "Read" method is strictly cryptographic. A successful resolution MUST satisfy:
1.  **Hash Equality:** `sha3-256(JCS(Log[0]))` equals the `method-specific-id`.
2.  **Signature Validity:** The signature on the most recent event in the log corresponds to a public key defined in the active state.

### 7.3 DID Document Projection
The resulting DID Document MUST contain an `id` field exactly matching the input `did:cel` string, including the `storage` parameter used for discovery, as this parameter is part of the identifier's resolvable URL.
