storage/README.md, before:


_The `did:cel` resolution, the read method is unofficial and provided for experimental purposes._

## Resolution (Read)

The resolution of a `did:cel` identifier is the process of retrieving and validating its event log to produce a compliant DID Document. This method is self-certifying and registry-agnostic, relying on the cryptographic integrity of the log's inception.

### Hybrid Discovery
The `did:cel` method supports a hybrid discovery model. While the `storage` parameter provides a high-performance, deterministic path for resolution, it does not represent a centralized point of failure, the identity is content-addressable, the same log can be hosted across multiple providers, peer-to-peer networks. 

### Algorithm
To resolve a `did:cel` identifier, a resolver MUST perform the following steps:

1. Extract the Commitment: Parse the `method-specific-id = multibase(base58btc, initialDidDocumentHash)` from the `did:cel` to obtain `initialDidDocumentHash`. 
2. Locate the Log: Retrieve the Event Log array from a distributed registry or a location specified by the `storage` parameter. If a `storage` URL is provided, the resolver MAY fetch the resource at `[URL][method-specific-id]`.
3. Verify Inception:
   1. Extract the create event log entry.
   2. Extract `didDocument` from the create event.
   3. The `didDocument.id` and `didDocument.assertionMethod.controller` fields MUST exactly match the `did:cel` which is being resolved.
   4. Recreate `initialDidDocument` by removing the `id` and `assertionMethod.controller` fields from the `didDocument`
   5. Perform `multihash(sha3-256(JCS(initialDidDocument)))`. The result value MUST exactly match the `initialDidDocumentHash` extracted from the DID.
5. Verify Integrity: Iterate through subsequent events ($E_n \dots E_0$), in reverse chronological order, starting with the newest entry, allowing `previousEventHash` to be reused if already cached or computed as needed. For each event, verify that:
    - For $E_n$ where $n \gt 1$, the `previousEventHash` MUST match the `sha3-256` hash of the previous event's document hash.
    - The event is signed by a key authorized in the state established by the previous event.
    - Witness Verification: The resolver MUST verify that the event contains a sufficient number of valid witness signatures. The specific threshold and selection of required witnesses are determined by application-level logic based on the trust requirements of the relying party.
6. Verify Liveness & Temporal Continuity: The resolver MUST verify a contiguous chain of heartbeat proofs throughout the log duration. 
    - Frequency Match: Heartbeats MUST occur at the interval frequency defined in the DID configuration or method defaults.
    - Continuity: Any gap in the heartbeat chain that exceeds the allowed threshold—without an accompanying deactivation or authorized suspension event—MUST result in a validation failure. This ensures that a storage provider cannot omit intermediate events or "freeze" the state in the past.
7. Project State: Apply the cumulative state changes defined in the verified log to construct the final DID Document.
8. Verify Origin: 
    - If the event log was retrieved by using a provided `storage` URL parameter, then that exact URL MUST be listed as an approved `CelStorageService` within the service section of the assembled DID Document.

### Immutability and Caching

The `did:cel` event log is a cryptographically immutable ledger. Because each event $E_n$ is linked via the hash of its predecessor $E_{n-1}$, the log functions as a tamper-evident chain. 

Resolvers SHOULD cache verified events, event logs, locally. Once an event is validated against the inception commitment and the chain of signatures, it never needs to be re-verified or re-fetched.

### `storage`, `CelStorageService`, and URL Construction

The `did:cel` resolver uses a simple string concatenation rule to find logs. The final fetch URL is formed by appending the `method-specific-id` directly to the storage URL.

**Examples**

Path-Based (Static Hosting):
  * `storage`: `https://storage.googleapis.com/did-cel-log/`
  * URL: `https://storage.googleapis.com/did-cel-log/zW1b...`

Query-Based (Dynamic API):
  * `storage`: `https://example/didcel?msid=`
  * URL: `https://example/didcel?msid=zW1b...`

Native IPFS (Content-Addressable):
  * `storage`: `ipfs://bafybeigdy.../`
  * URL: `ipfs://bafybeigdy.../zW1b...`

#### DID URL Parameter

* **Key:** `storage`
* **Value:** A valid URI (typically `https://...`) pointing to a directory or service.
* **Resolution Rule:** The resolver appends the `method-specific-id` to the `storage` value to form the final fetch URL.


---

# GCS `CellStorageService` Endpoint

Manual provisioning of Google Cloud Storage resources to serve as the `CellStorageService`. This section describes the manual process for initializing storage and uploading the initial log.

## Creating the Storage Bucket
The bucket acts as the static repository for the DID Event Logs. A single bucket can host any number of `did:cel` logs as flat files.

1.  **Create Bucket:** Initialize a bucket in a preferred region.
    ```bash
    gcloud storage buckets create gs://[STORAGE] --location=[REGION]
    ```
2.  **Enable Public Access:**  
To prevent the enumeration of all DIDs stored within a registry, the storage bucket is configured to allow "Direct Object Fetch" while disabling "Bucket Listing."

  2.1.  **Selection of Role:** A custom IAM role (e.g., `celLogViewer`) is defined at the project level. This role must contain the `storage.objects.get` permission and must exclude the `storage.objects.list` permission.
  2.2.  **Configuration Command:**
   ```bash
   gcloud iam roles create celLogViewer \
        --project=[PROJECT_ID] \
        --title="did:cel Log Viewer" \
        --permissions=storage.objects.get
   ``` 
   ```bash
   gcloud storage buckets add-iam-policy-binding gs://[STORAGE] \
        --member="allUsers" \
        --role="projects/[PROJECT_ID]/roles/celLogViewer"
   ```
  2.3.  **Resulting Behavior:**
   * Public Access: `GET /[method-specific-id]` returns the log.
   * Unauthorized Discovery: `GET /` (root listing) returns a `403 Forbidden` response.
    
## Manual Log Upload
The initial log must be formatted as a JSON array containing the inception event ($E_0$) where the blob name is `method-specific-id`.

1.  **Naming Convention:** If the DID is `did:cel:zW1bVJv...`, the blob name must be `zW1bVJv...`.
2.  **Upload Command:**
    ```bash
    gcloud storage cp log.json gs://[STORAGE]/[method-specific-id]
    ```
3.  **Metadata Configuration:** Ensure the `Content-Type` is set to `application/json` to prevent resolution errors during the fetch phase.
    ```bash
    gcloud storage objects update gs://[STORAGE]/[method-specific-id] \
        --content-type="application/json"
    ```

## Validation of Resolution

A resolver fetching the log receives a `200 OK` status with `Content-Type: application/json`.

  **Direct Fetch Test:**
  ```bash
  curl -H "Accept: application/json" -I https://storage.googleapis.com/[STORAGE]/[method-specific-id]
  ```

## DID URL Construction
Once uploaded, the `storage` parameter in the DID URL may point to the bucket's public storage base:
`did:cel:method-specific-id?storage=https://storage.googleapis.com/[STORAGE]/`

Commit message:

Add note about storage diversity

storage/README.md, after:


_The `did:cel` resolution, the read method is unofficial and provided for experimental purposes._

## Resolution (Read)

The resolution of a `did:cel` identifier is the process of retrieving and validating its event log to produce a compliant DID Document. This method is self-certifying and registry-agnostic, relying on the cryptographic integrity of the log's inception.

### Hybrid Discovery
The `did:cel` method supports a hybrid discovery model. While the `storage` parameter provides a high-performance, deterministic path for resolution, it does not represent a centralized point of failure, the identity is content-addressable, the same log can be hosted across multiple providers, peer-to-peer networks. 

### Algorithm
To resolve a `did:cel` identifier, a resolver MUST perform the following steps:

1. Extract the Commitment: Parse the `method-specific-id = multibase(base58btc, initialDidDocumentHash)` from the `did:cel` to obtain `initialDidDocumentHash`. 
2. Locate the Log: Retrieve the Event Log array from a distributed registry or a location specified by the `storage` parameter. If a `storage` URL is provided, the resolver MAY fetch the resource at `[URL][method-specific-id]`.
3. Verify Inception:
   1. Extract the create event log entry.
   2. Extract `didDocument` from the create event.
   3. The `didDocument.id` and `didDocument.assertionMethod.controller` fields MUST exactly match the `did:cel` which is being resolved.
   4. Recreate `initialDidDocument` by removing the `id` and `assertionMethod.controller` fields from the `didDocument`
   5. Perform `multihash(sha3-256(JCS(initialDidDocument)))`. The result value MUST exactly match the `initialDidDocumentHash` extracted from the DID.
5. Verify Integrity: Iterate through subsequent events ($E_n \dots E_0$), in reverse chronological order, starting with the newest entry, allowing `previousEventHash` to be reused if already cached or computed as needed. For each event, verify that:
    - For $E_n$ where $n \gt 1$, the `previousEventHash` MUST match the `sha3-256` hash of the previous event's document hash.
    - The event is signed by a key authorized in the state established by the previous event.
    - Witness Verification: The resolver MUST verify that the event contains a sufficient number of valid witness signatures. The specific threshold and selection of required witnesses are determined by application-level logic based on the trust requirements of the relying party.
6. Verify Liveness & Temporal Continuity: The resolver MUST verify a contiguous chain of heartbeat proofs throughout the log duration. 
    - Frequency Match: Heartbeats MUST occur at the interval frequency defined in the DID configuration or method defaults.
    - Continuity: Any gap in the heartbeat chain that exceeds the allowed threshold—without an accompanying deactivation or authorized suspension event—MUST result in a validation failure. This ensures that a storage provider cannot omit intermediate events or "freeze" the state in the past.
7. Project State: Apply the cumulative state changes defined in the verified log to construct the final DID Document.
8. Verify Origin: 
    - If the event log was retrieved by using a provided `storage` URL parameter, then that exact URL MUST be listed as an approved `CelStorageService` within the service section of the assembled DID Document.

### Immutability and Caching

The `did:cel` event log is a cryptographically immutable ledger. Because each event $E_n$ is linked via the hash of its predecessor $E_{n-1}$, the log functions as a tamper-evident chain. 

Resolvers SHOULD cache verified events, event logs, locally. Once an event is validated against the inception commitment and the chain of signatures, it never needs to be re-verified or re-fetched.

### `storage`, `CelStorageService`, and URL Construction

The `did:cel` resolver uses a simple string concatenation rule to find logs. The final fetch URL is formed by appending the `method-specific-id` directly to the storage URL.

**Examples**

Path-Based (Static Hosting):
  * `storage`: `https://storage.googleapis.com/did-cel-log/`
  * URL: `https://storage.googleapis.com/did-cel-log/zW1b...`

Query-Based (Dynamic API):
  * `storage`: `https://example/didcel?msid=`
  * URL: `https://example/didcel?msid=zW1b...`

Native IPFS (Content-Addressable):
  * `storage`: `ipfs://bafybeigdy.../`
  * URL: `ipfs://bafybeigdy.../zW1b...`

#### DID URL Parameter

* **Key:** `storage`
* **Value:** A valid URI (typically `https://...`) pointing to a directory or service.
* **Resolution Rule:** The resolver appends the `method-specific-id` to the `storage` value to form the final fetch URL.


---

# GCS `CellStorageService` Endpoint

Manual provisioning of Google Cloud Storage resources to serve as the `CellStorageService`. This section describes the manual process for initializing storage and uploading the initial log.

Although GCS provides high availability and durability, within the `did:cel` ecosystem it is recommended to distribute logs across a diverse set of storage provider to reduce reliance on any single infrastructure vendor. A GCS-backed `CellStorageService` can be one such provider, complementing others to improve redundancy, resilience, and data accessibility.

## Creating the Storage Bucket
The bucket acts as the static repository for the DID Event Logs. A single bucket can host any number of `did:cel` logs as flat files.

1.  **Create Bucket:** Initialize a bucket in a preferred region.
    ```bash
    gcloud storage buckets create gs://[STORAGE] --location=[REGION]
    ```
2.  **Enable Public Access:**  
To prevent the enumeration of all DIDs stored within a registry, the storage bucket is configured to allow "Direct Object Fetch" while disabling "Bucket Listing."

  2.1.  **Selection of Role:** A custom IAM role (e.g., `celLogViewer`) is defined at the project level. This role must contain the `storage.objects.get` permission and must exclude the `storage.objects.list` permission.
  2.2.  **Configuration Command:**
   ```bash
   gcloud iam roles create celLogViewer \
        --project=[PROJECT_ID] \
        --title="did:cel Log Viewer" \
        --permissions=storage.objects.get
   ``` 
   ```bash
   gcloud storage buckets add-iam-policy-binding gs://[STORAGE] \
        --member="allUsers" \
        --role="projects/[PROJECT_ID]/roles/celLogViewer"
   ```
  2.3.  **Resulting Behavior:**
   * Public Access: `GET /[method-specific-id]` returns the log.
   * Unauthorized Discovery: `GET /` (root listing) returns a `403 Forbidden` response.
    
## Manual Log Upload
The initial log must be formatted as a JSON array containing the inception event ($E_0$) where the blob name is `method-specific-id`.

1.  **Naming Convention:** If the DID is `did:cel:zW1bVJv...`, the blob name must be `zW1bVJv...`.
2.  **Upload Command:**
    ```bash
    gcloud storage cp log.json gs://[STORAGE]/[method-specific-id]
    ```
3.  **Metadata Configuration:** Ensure the `Content-Type` is set to `application/json` to prevent resolution errors during the fetch phase.
    ```bash
    gcloud storage objects update gs://[STORAGE]/[method-specific-id] \
        --content-type="application/json"
    ```

## Validation of Resolution

A resolver fetching the log receives a `200 OK` status with `Content-Type: application/json`.

  **Direct Fetch Test:**
  ```bash
  curl -H "Accept: application/json" -I https://storage.googleapis.com/[STORAGE]/[method-specific-id]
  ```

## DID URL Construction
Once uploaded, the `storage` parameter in the DID URL may point to the bucket's public storage base:
`did:cel:method-specific-id?storage=https://storage.googleapis.com/[STORAGE]/`
